Jake  Mendiola  knew  he  had  a  problem.  He  was  37 years  old.  At 5/10”  and 230 pounds,  he was  heavier  than his doctor  liked.  His sedentary  lifestyle, as an  information  technology  specialist  at  a major  accounting  firm,  meant  he did  not  get the exercise  that  his wife  and  his physician  thought  he should. His physical  exams  over  the past  several  years  showed a nagging  increase in total cholesterol  levels  (237 mg/dl);  the low-density  lipoprotein  (LDL; “bad”) was  too  high,  and the  good  high-density  lipoprotein  (HDL)  was  too  low.  His physician  had  twice  recommended  exercise  at least  three  days a week  and some  dietary  modification  to  get  the  cholesterol  lower.  Mr.  Mendiola  went part  way.  He cut  down  on  eggs  for breakfast.  He intentionally  signed  up for the  cheaper  parking  lot at  work  so  he would  be forced  to walk  about  three blocks  to  his  office.  He  knew,  however,  that  this  was  not exactly  what  his physician  had  in mind. Now at a routine  trip to his HMO  (health maintenance  organization),  his doctor  nagged  him  again  about  diet  and exercise.  The physician  continued to worry  about the cholesterol,  pointing out that  the treatment  protocol at the HMO  indicated  that  diet and  exercise  should  bring the cholesterol  into line. If not,  Mr.  Mendiola  was  going  to have  to go on  one  of the new  cholesterol- lowering  medications  called “statins.” The  effect  on  Mr.  Mendiola  was  not  what  ibe  physician had  oepeced. A question occurred  to Mr. Mendiola.  He said to himself, “Do you mean I  could get the  same  cholesterol  reduction  by simply  taking  the  pill and  still eat what  I have been  eating  and  not  sign  up  for  the  plan  at  the  local  gym?” Mr. Mendiola  considered  his options:  (1) ask the doctor  to put him on  a statin drug right now,  (2) intentionally avoid  the diet  and exercise  regimen  until  his next  physical  exam  when  the physician  would  discover  that  his cholesterol was  still too high and, on his own,  write the prescription  for the statin  drug, or (3) attempt  to  follow  more  faithfully  the  physician's  recommendation  about diet  and  exercise  to  see  if the  cholesterol  problem  will  be taken  care  of. Of course,  there was a fourth option—take his chances and continue  with a high- cholesterol  level,  unmedicated  and uncontrolled  by either diet or exercise. Commentary At first this  case  may appear  to raise  no  evaluative  issues  at all. The physician  was giving  standard  medical  advice  and was  following  a treatment  protocol  endorsed by  the HMO  and widely  accepted  in the medical  community. Chapter  2   Valuesin  Healthand  Illness  |  31  32  |  roumu!  I  Searching  for  the  value  terms,  however,  reveals  a  number  of judgments that  are  clearly  in  the  realm  of values.  They  begin  to  appear  in  the  very  first line.  Mr.  Mendiola  recognized  he had what  he called  a “problem.”  That is already an  evaluative  judgment.  To say that one  has a problem  is to say that there  is some- thing bad about  the situation.  In the next  sentence,  we  see  that the physician  was not  happy  with  the patient’s  weight.  That  is a judgment  on  the doctor’s  part that something  is wrong. In the third  sentence,  the word  “should”  signals  that both  the physician  and the patient’s  wife are  making  value judgments.  In the next  sentence, high-density  and  low-density  lipids  are  classified  as  “good”  and  “bad.”  Both  his wife and his physician  thought his life would  be better if  he got more exercise.  This is followed  by a recommendation  from  the physician  that  Mr.  Mendiola  begin  a regimen of  exercise and diet.  Any “recommendation”  conveys  that the one  making it evaluates  the proposed  course  of  action positively. Mr.  Mendiola’s  responses  involved  further  evaluation.  He  changed  his behavior—at  least modestly.  He cut down  on  eggs  and signed  up for a parking  lot that  would  force  him  to  walk  some  each  day. The  parking  lot choice  involves  a rather  complicated  set  of value  judgments:  he  no  doubt  valued  the  money  he would  save  but did  not  like  the  extra  walking.  Up until  this  time,  he apparently believed  that  spending  the  extra  money  to  get the more  convenient  parking  was worth  it, but  with  his  re-evaluation  taking  into  account  the  newly  appreciated value  of  some  extra  walking,  he apparently  decided  the combined  benefits  of the saving  and the exercise  outweighed  the inconvenience  of the extra  walking. These evaluations  are  all preliminary  to the main  focus  of  the case. The physician seems  convinced  that  the  cholesterol  is higher  than  it should  be; that  is, that  bad things  are  more  likely to  happen  with  continued  high cholesterol  levels.  Moreover, he recognizes  that there  are  at least two  possible  strategies to lower  the cholesterol— either  a combined  plan  of diet  and  exercise  or  the  use  of statin  drugs.  Finally,  he seems  to accept  the value judgment  of  the writers of  the HMO protocol that diet and exercise  should  be tried  first, that they offer  better  chance  of overall benefit. That judgment  is so  commonly  held  among  medical  professionals  that  many are  likely  to  assume  that  somehow  it is a fact  of medicine  that  diet  and  exercise are  a better  first approach  to the problem  of high cholesterol.  That turns  out  to be a category  mistake.  It is not  a fact that  diet  and  exercise  are  better  than  drugs.  It may turn  out  to be a widely  held  value judgment,  but it is a value  judgment  none- theless.  Diet  and exercise  are  cheaper  than  drugs;  they do not pose  the risk of  side  effects  that the statin  drugs  do; and they  have  some  other  features  that  appeal  to many people.  ‘They are  thought  of as  “natural”  rather  than  as “artificial”  or “chem- ical”  interventions.  All of these  considerations  lead  many  people  to  evaluate  diet and exercise  as  preferable  at least  as  a first response  to high  cholesterol. Even  though  many  people  are  concerned  about  the pharmacological  risks  of statin  drugs  (they can  cause  liver  toxicity,  for example),  and  they  are  attracted  to the economic  and philosophical  features  of interventions  that they  consider  “nat- ural,” there  are  also  problems  with  the diet  and  exercise  approach.  Mr.  Mendiola is clearly among  those  who  do not  find  exercise  particularly  enjoyable.  He appar- ently likes  foods  that  contribute  to  his cholesterol  problem  rather  than  those  that Ethics  and  Values  in  Medical  Cases would  help reduce  it. This  leaves  him  in a bind.  He perceives  disvalue  in the diet and  exercise  regimen.  He  seems  to  evaluate  that  regimen  differently  than  the doctor  and his colleagues.  He may  also evaluate  the benefits  and risks  of  the statin drugs  differently.  Surely,  taking  the  drug  is  easier,  perhaps  much  easier  in Mr. Mendiola’s  opinion.  He may also judge  the pharmacological  risks  differently. He  may  not  adequately  appreciate  the  problems  statin  drugs  can  cause.  On  the other  hand,  he may  fully understand  and  simply  make  the value  judgment  that the small  risk of a serious  liver  problem  from  the statin  drug is less  onerous  than the certain  disvalue  of the diet  and exercise  program. It seems  like this patient  and physician  simply have  different  assessments  of  the benefits  and risks  of the options  that  are  available.  They have  made  different  value judgments.  Is there  any way that one  could  claim  that the physician  has  made  the correct  evaluation?  It should be clear  that there  is no  amount  of  medical science  that could  prove  whether  the  physician’s  evaluation  was  correct.  If Mr.  Mendiola  were ignoring  the risk of the statin  drugs,  if  he had not  been  told about  the liver toxicity risk,  then  the physician  would  have  been  working with  a different  set  of facts.  He would  have  failed  to  inform  his patient.  But,  assuming  that  the doctor  adequately informed  the patient,  there  is no way  that medical  science  can  prove  that the risks  of the drug  outweigh  the negatives  of the diet and exercise.  Even  if all physicians be- lieved  the drug’s  risks were  more  weighty,  that would  not  constitute  proof.  It would merely show  that  doctors  evaluate  the options  in a particular  way.  A double-blind, controlled  study with  large  numbers  of patients  would  be convincing  evidence  of what  the effects  of the two  approaches  would  be. It could  identify the intended  and unintended  effects  of each  alternative  but still  could  not  prove  which  set  of effects would  be better.  That is a value  choice  not  amenable  to medical  science. Some  philosophers  hold  that  some  value  judgments—perhaps  the  one  com- paring  the risks  of drugs and of diet  and exercise—can  be held to some  objective standard.  They claim  that, at least in the ideal,  there  are  objective  lists of  right and wrong  evaluations.  In aesthetics,  for example,  they might  hold  that  the  soprano Renée  Fleming  is “objectively”  a  better  singer  than  pop  vocalist  Miley  Cyrus. People  who  hold  this  position  are  sometimes  called  “objective  list  theorists.”! Others  hold that value judgments are  inherently  subjective,  that there  is no  external objective  standard  of  what is good and what  is bad. For purposes  of medical ethical  decisions,  however, we  need  not  settle  this  dif- ficult  question.  Even  if there  is some  objectively  correct  answer  to  the  question  of which  set  of risks  and benefits  among  alternative  medical  treatments  is preferable, this is surely  not  a question  that medical  science  can  answer.  For evaluations  such  as this,  increasingly patients’  value judgments  are  seen  as  requiring  respect.  These  are not a matter  of  ethics. These  are what  could be called nonmoral value judgments.  For these, either there are  no  objective  standards  of  good and bad or, if  there are,  they are not  matters  of medical  science.  Many  health  professionals  and,  in fact,  many  lay- people may  agree  with  the doctor  that the risks  and benefits  of diet and exercise  are more  attractive  as a  first line of therapy, but, if  they do, it is an  evaluative judgment, not a medical  fact.  Unless  one  can  develop  a  definitive list of  objective values  for such choices,  it will not be possible  to prove  that one  choice  or  the other  is superior.